everyone Laszlo Montgomery here
finishing up this chp overview of the
life of Premier Joe and lie one of
history's great men and in the PRC at
least one of the most beloved leaders of
modern Chinese history you're gonna get
about an episode and a half this time
hope you don't mind I'm only gonna
charge you for a single episode we left
off last time with the tragic story of
sunway sure Joe and lies adopted
daughter who died at the hands of a
vengeful Jiang Ching you see Mao may
have thrown cold water on the Red Guards
after they spiraled out of control and
after they had served their purpose from
now but the terror continued there were
still campaigns like cleansing the class
ranks and the three loyalties and for
boundless loves in the former over 36
million people got persecuted and
anywhere between 750,000 a million and a
half were killed many by their own hand
the Red Guards were young king's chief
power base so when Mao said they should
all disband and one by one they got sent
down to the countryside Jeong Ching
sorta lost her primary weapon of terror
and authority the chief criticism I hear
directed against Joe and Lai was that he
too willingly gave in mouths whims and
never tried to organize in the
opposition tomorrow the historical
record is quite clear from 1966 to 1969
Joe and my wave that little red book is
enthusiastically as the next believer he
led rallies made appearances with
radicals and exhibited nothing but the
most fervent support for the Cultural
Revolution to have done otherwise who
knows Joe and I always followed Mao and
no matter if he was disposing of an old
comrade or making a major speech he
always did the right thing that's what
my liked about Joe
he was very stable and reliable going
back to the 1930s inside
Monu Joe is lip-synching to all the
propaganda but as long as he outwardly
showed the utmost loyalty and support
Mao didn't make any moves against him if
Jiang Qing linphea or any other high
King somebody wanted to take Joe and lie
down they had to get miles and initials
on the permission slip but Mao had a
very complex relationship with Joe first
of all Joe and live he could say nothing
else about him was very good at his job
as premier he was in charge of the whole
state government operation Mao knew that
if he let Joe and Lai get plowed under
in the course of the Cultural Revolution
it wouldn't have been good for China and
in the end not good for him though mouse
heart lay in the leftist camp whose
better judgment always got the best of
them when it came to leading the state
or at the very worst staving off China's
economic collapse and financial ruin Joe
and Lai may have shed the Foreign
Minister title but he was still very
hands-on and met with foreign leaders
and dignitaries passing through China
honey the one who took over as Foreign
Minister in 1958 wound up on the wrong
side of the Cultural Revolution so Joe
once again was wearing that unofficial
foreign ministers mantle in the cities
towns and villages and factories the
military all the ministries government
offices and of course within the CCP
itself by 1969 pretty much everyone we
had something to hide
as far as falling short of the standards
of the leftists went they had already
been mowed down Joe had the dubious
honor of well I happen to be the one the
most vociferously declare the Cultural
Revolution a great success and at the
same time clean up all the wreckage left
in its wake
mouse that this huge brush fire that
engulf the entire nation and then he
appointed premier Joe and John King to
manage it from 1966 when it all started
and all the way through to the end it
was an epic power struggle between those
two with regard to management of the
Cultural Revolution and the direction
the country would take the dynamic in
1969 and Mao was 76 and he wasn't too
healthy but could still get around Joe
was 71 and suffered from a number of
ailments and had a bad heart condition
but all in all
you still had a spring in a step and is
robust but ultimately unsuccessful
defense of Cheung Yee he has suffered a
serious heart attack he survived it okay
but that would all change John King in
1969 was a very active and energetic 55
years old Mao around this time was
really into the whole world Communists
unite thing and spreading Revolution and
well spreading his ideology Mao Zedong
Thought around the world he styled
himself as the one remaining legit
revolutionary that stayed true to the
Marxist Leninist cause when it's
tarnished as the ideology may have
gotten by 1969 Mao's idea about
continuous revolution had gotten written
into the party Constitution that came
out of the ninth Party Congress this was
B CCP Congress that turned out like more
of a Red Guard rally than anything this
was the meeting where the leftists got
to take their victory lap lil sha Chi
dung and all Joe's closest allies were
out Leo with died in agony got his jail
cell floor later in the same year
thankfully Mao Zedong wasn't prepared to
let China go totally down the drain the
direction it was heading around this
time if there was no Chinese state than
my lost his legitimacy so for this he
always made sure Jo was protected but
between 1969 and the day premier Jo
passed away in 1976 it was the most ear
tight full-court press that you can
imagine every day until he passed Jo was
living under a microscope every
utterance he made or document he signed
his enemies picked through sniffed
weighed always looking for something
anything that they could run to Ma with
that might diminish Jo and create
mistrust between the Chairman and his
number three when Richard Nixon began
reaching out as soon as he sat down in
the Oval Office in early 1969 Mao was
quite excited about this establishing
relations with the US was a very big
priority for Mao he may have been
railing against the
can imperialists and leading the chairs
about how rotten America was but aside
from that given the Russian situation
and making friends from far away to put
the squeeze on those who are close by
plus all the other potential perks Mao
responded positively to Nixon's
overtures made through backchannels that
had been established by Jo during the
good old days in 1954 or following the
Geneva Conference perfect timing as far
as Mao was concerned the military
confrontations along the Ussuri River in
March of that fateful year 1969 on the
sino-soviet border and later on in
Shenyang as well had pushed the needle
about as far as it could go in the
direction of bad relations with the
Russians the USA had always been a nice
prop for Mao during the Cultural
Revolution now he had a different use
for Uncle Sam and his ideological
struggle with the Soviets Mao naturally
put Joe in charge of this USA project
then because this was important to Mao
Zhong Ching couldn't go against it
same with Lin Biao they were both dead
set against this whole Nixon thing
nothing good could possibly come out of
this for either of them but it went
ahead 1969 1970 and finally into 1971
things hotted up Joe managed the whole
affair all messages being secretly
passed back and forth through mutual
friends because there were no direct
relations between China and the US ended
up being read and answered personally by
Joe Henry Kissinger secretly flew from
Pakistan to Beijing to hold direct talks
with Joe in February 9th and 10th this
was in 1971 Kissinger's visit put into
motion a concatenation of events that
led to Richard Nixon's dramatic visit to
China the great handshake photo with Joe
and ly and Chairman Mao and the Shanghai
communique signed during the week that
changed the world February 21st - 27
1972 besides the matter of Taiwan the
other main topic of discussion was the
Vietnam War
although aid to the Vietcong from China
was affected by the chaos created by the
Cultural Revolution it continued to flow
and the manager
of China's involvement was and had
always been Joe's responsibility by 1971
China's aid to Vietnam was at its
highest level Jo knew the US was trying
to get out of Vietnam and it wouldn't be
such a bad thing if it ended for China
to the drain on the Treasury was
terrible but Jo was firm no u.s. puppet
states allowed on China's borders
I covered Nixon's visit to China before
in one of those ancient episodes from
2010 that was a two-parter chp eight and
nine in the interest of time i'm gonna
skip over all the details of Nixon's
China visit and what an absolute
superstar Jo and I was in front of the
world press but I do encourage you to go
listen to those two CHP episodes if you
haven't already
but before Richard Milhous Nixon walked
down those steps of Air Force One and
shook Joann lies hand there was plenty
of action going on in and around chil
non-high 1969 was a year of many things
one of which was dissent in the ranks of
the leftist Jang Kings people maybe with
all perceived enemies either dead in
prison disgraced or disabled there was
no one else to turn on therefore the
radical leftists began turning on each
other
the first big boon was when longtime
chung chien supporter Chen hua broke
with the Cultural Revolution group and
became a client of Lin Bo Lin was
politically not allied with Zhang Xuan
Chow and yawen yen and by extension Jian
Ching from 1966 to 1968 John Chiang and
Lin Bo had been forced to remain strange
bedfellows like everyone else lean
couldn't stand John Chiang this
political dynamic gave Joe some degree
of wiggle room and he manipulated events
people's egos frustrations and whatever
else he had to do to maintain order and
keep all balls in the air
but then came Lin Biao fatal error at
the plenum held at Liu Shan in August
September 1970 following the ninth Party
Congress Liu
again where the young river meets poi on
Lake and Chung she province that used to
be John kai-shek summer retreat back in
the day June 1937 joe and i sat with
Chiang kai-shek at Liu Shan half a year
after the kidnapping the Xian incident
and discussed strategy with the
Generalissimo and their united front
against the Japanese invaders George
Marshall had come to Lucien after the
war to discuss China's role in the
post-war New World Order in 1959 at Lu
Xiang Mao had unjustly purged Punga why
for daring to speak out against the
disastrous Great Leap Forward in August
September 1970 came another historic
showdown in beautiful scenic mount Liu
this was the second plenum of the ninth
central committee limp yahwah's miles
heir-presumptive and if things went as
planned when Mao died Lin would wield
supreme power too bad for Lin the Jiang
Qing also had her sights on the same
exact supreme power
lindy and lose favor with Mao around the
time he began lobbying for the state
chairman position left open since the
fall of Leo Xiao Qi Mao perhaps saw that
Lin had stacked the PLA with his men of
the three existing factions that is
Jiang Qing and her CCR G radical
followers Lin Biao in the military and
Jo and live Lin was the most powerful
Mao's old comrades were all out Lin had
seen to that and Mao had allowed it all
to happen but now Mao was getting the
sneaking suspicion that Lin was gonna
make a power grab there's two ways
historians look at this one way is that
it was a power grab by Lin the other was
that Lin was just doing all he could to
defend himself being Myles number two
wasn't all it was cut out to be as Lin
we'll find out Jo had no problem reading
the tea leaves and he saw what lune dad
he did his best to stay out of this
conflict and stuck to the tried and true
formula of trying to please Mao he
stayed on the side
lines while this epic battle started
shaping up if Joe had to choose sides
his sympathies live more with Lin Biao
than Cheng Cheng but he knew better than
to get involved in that showdown Joe
also went out of his way not to pick any
fights with Yong Cheng and not to allow
her to get the best of him she baited
him constantly showered him with scorn
and in front of everyone openly and
aggressively challenged and disrespected
him Joe had to put up with it he had no
choice she was my wife often his proxy
and his chief weapon of destruction
well Mao chose this plenum at Liu Shan
to let everyone know how he felt about
Lin Biao wanting the state president
position he used the whole matter of who
should be the next state president as
his means of making his opening moves
against Lin Mao thought the position a
ceremonial one should just be left
vacant Leo Xiao Qi used to hold it but
now that he was purged there was no need
to fill it Lin Qiao for some reason was
unable or was just unwilling to read the
tea leaves because when Mao made his
position known Lin kept pushing just
like several years ago when Mao wanted
to take a swipe at Leo Xiao Qi he went
after Poong Jun one of Leo's men now at
this meeting Mao lashed out violently at
his former secretary Chen Botha the
turncoat leftist who had switched camps
abandoning Chang Ching for Lin Bo back
in 1959 Mao had used Chen hua to destroy
ponga Hawaii now it was Chun's turn to
feel what that was like and for Lin pl2
he began to find out the hard way what
Leo Xiao Qi had gone through for Chou
Enlai this was quite a blessing to
counter Lin Qiao's influence Mao caved
show the okay to start bringing back
many old cadres who had been thrown
under the bus the past few years these
were mostly all casualties of Lin bow
and his efforts to consolidate power for
the remainder of 1970 until September
1971 Lin Bao had the watch
whole life get deconstructed in slow
motion now to any way you look at it
getting rid of Lin Biao made him look
bad the obvious reasons were Lin was his
chosen successor and Lin had been the
producer of the whole Mao cult in the
little red book
now Mao gets rid of them that didn't
look good for Mao Zedong there wasn't a
lot of time left on the clock and this
latest turn of events reflected poorly
on the Cultural Revolution and the air
for and his legacy damn Khrushchev in
the 1956 secret speech never did mal
think that ending up like Stalin was
more possible than now despite his
unwavering loyalty Mao didn't trust that
Joe would preserve his legacy Lin was on
his way out as far as my resting easy
that no one would revise the history
books and make him look bad
there was only Jung Chang and her
faction of leftist radical followers Mao
knew his best shot was with them the
only problem was that while this group
was masterful at smashing things up and
wrecking people's lives they were
terrible at managing the levers of
government administration and commerce
time and again whenever leftist seized
power things descended into chaos and
terrible societal disruption so my
strategy was to force Joanne lie and
Chung King to work together those two
who so openly despised and hated each
other under this forced arrangement she
became a handicap to Jo until the hour
he died but just like he had to do when
the Great Leap Forward ended Jo had to
take charge and make everything look
completely normal and that Lin's fall
from grace had nothing to do with the
success and greatness of the Cultural
Revolution while Joe managed this he was
heavily involved and bringing back many
of the more capable technocrats and
conservatives who were put back in power
and worked tirelessly to get China's
engine going again just as it started a
sputter yeah and in 1970 early 1971 as
usual premier Joe at his hands full
managing the fate of the country's
recovery domestically
internationally American date on to the
Vietnam War the Soviets not to mention
the future of the CCP nothing too big he
had another heart attack during this
period but as far as Jo's health went
the worst was still yet to come in the
midst of all the ongoing discussions
with the Americans Jo also handled the
matter of the invitation of the u.s.
ping-pong team to China this was all Jo
and ly political theater and it's best I
read the whole thing was a setup luring
Glenn Cowan on to the Chinese team boss
joins to the dong asking him if he
wanted to play in China making sure the
press assembled in Nagoya that day
witnessed the whole thing
whatever the case may be on April 6 1971
the US team was in Japan for the World
Table Tennis Championships before you
could say the words ping-pong diplomacy
on April 10th the first group of
Americans since 1949 were formally
allowed into the PRC on the 14th Joe met
with these American players and they
laid the schmaltz on nice and thick
setting this whole thing up and pulling
it off as smoothly as he did really did
a lot to juice up the ongoing us-china
talks going on quietly behind the scenes
later that same month with this air of
inevitability Joe sent a message to
Nixon via the Pakistanis that China was
ready to perceive Nixon's envoy to
discuss Taiwan and other matters of
mutual interest edgar snow had
interviewed Chairman Mao in December 18
1970 and Life magazine carried the
interview in their end of April issue in
the interview Mao said it was okay for
Nixon to come to China either as a
tourist or president while all this was
going on Joe also had to carefully
manage the mile limpio struggle Lin had
fallen into mouse trap from which there
was no escape Joe tried to talk some
sense into Lin but Lin wouldn't have it
for example he suggested for the 1971
May Day rally wouldn't it be great for
the sake of showing unity if Lin showed
up Lin ended up going but he openly
snubbed Chairman Mao
and during the rally the party's number1
and number2 wouldn't talk to each other
despite Joe's efforts to moderate both
sides weren't gonna consider backing
down by the summer of 1971 it was
getting uglier and uglier by August the
situation for Lin who was desperate Mao
was already making moves to visit with
key military leaders in the south and
was obviously making sure the PLA was
loyal to him first
wherever mile went he would attack Lin
Biao not by name but he used enough
innuendo so that you didn't need an
overabundance of brain cells to know who
he was attacking classic Mao closing in
for the kill now so we all know what
happens 10 p.m. on the night of
September 12th Joe and I was working
late at the Great Hall of the People and
he got a call from Lindy Isles daughter
who got wind of what was going down with
Lin's ill-fated plan the whole thing
sounded too far out to believe but Joe
made a few calls and learned this was
really happening when he called wolfish
in one of Lin's closest allies in the
military he knew something was up Joe
sprang into action and for the entirety
of the Lin Biao incident that went down
the evening of September 12th and 13th
1971 he was the one in the middle of it
Lin and his party which included his
wife yet hoon and his son Lindley Gua
were at the CCP leadership compound at
bay died huh the Trident aircraft that
Lin was planning to use to make his
escape was parked about an hour's drive
north at Shanghai Quan Airport
bhishan haiquan of course the location
where the Great Wall begins when Joe
told Mao what was going on it appeared
that now already knew about Lin's plan
he told Joe to stand down and wait to
see how this played out Joe was in touch
with yet Qin and let her know that he
knew what was going on and so did
Chairman Mao he advised her to talk some
sense to her husband and to give up just
as George Bush did immediately following
the 9/11 attacks Joe ordered
planes in China grounded he called for
Mao to be bundled up and taken to a
bunker safely underground beneath the
Great Hall the people supposedly around
midnight what really happened may never
be known the 83 forty-one palace guards
were closing in on the jet park to shun
hike one Airport as the legend goes
there wasn't enough time to gas up the
plane and it went barreling down the
runway before they could be stopped and
a little under two hours later the plane
had crossed over into Mongolian airspace
Joe called Mao and asked for permission
to shoot the plane down with a missile
with a vice chairman of the party on
board only Mao could make that call
according to some accounts Mao replied
to Cho Chen yah yah yah yah n-woo [ __ ]
up you'll touch you by which means the
heavens must rain and a woman wants to
be Wed nothing can be done about this
let him go and legend has it sometime in
the middle of the night Lin's plane ran
out of fuel and crashed in eastern
Mongolia in a town whose name I dare not
try to pronounce this was a long night
for Joe and the amount of damage control
that needed to be done was considerable
it was time once again for Joe to
protect Mao's face and find some way to
stabilize things as he did following the
Great Leap Joe devised a way to spin the
whole lianbao incident into something
that that didn't reflect poorly on Mao
Zedong at this dark hour in party
history Joe became the communications
pipeline between Mao the leaders and the
military Joe called an emergency meeting
of the Politburo he told everyone what
happened next he put the military on
high alert for a possible Soviet attack
if there was ever a moment when China
was vulnerable and ripe for attack the
aftermath of the Lin Biao incident was a
good time the next day on September 14th
the PRC embassy in Mongolia confirmed
that Lin's plane had indeed crashed in
Mongolia so once again the number two
position and the CCP hierarchy was
vacated and Joe and Lai rank
third sort of became the next in line of
the Communist Party version of the
dragon throne and no one knew better
than Joe what a terrible spot this was
to be in this reflected terribly
involved he was really devastated the
Chairman had allowed Lindy out to whack
all his most trusted and loyal comrades
all these old marshals who had led the
PLA to victory over the Nationalists
were living in disgrace all victims of
the Cultural Revolution Mao had sat back
and watched them get savaged by the
leftist as they sank Lin BL Rose along
with all his cronies now this happened
and you can imagine how uncomfortable it
must have been for Mao that's why a few
months later when China died Mao used
this opportunity to try and patch things
up with his old comrades in January 1972
Mao was 78 years old and now starting to
show obvious signs that he could go at
any time
normally for a sick old man like this
and being Chairman Mao and all Chinese
funeral yeah wouldn't be an occasion
that he would rise from his bed to
attend but Mao had a lot of making up to
do and he ordered his aides and
attendants to get him ready and take him
to Chinese funeral at Papa shun as soon
as Joe got word of this being chief
choreography in these cases he
completely changed the funeral
proceedings the pomp and ceremony of
these kinds of occasions were you know
determined by whether mile went or not
when Mao showed up which was not often
things had to be done a little
differently it was a bitterly cold
January day in Beijing when Mao arrived
at the funeral ceremony he was still
clad in his pajamas and was not in good
shape nor was he looking too good but
everyone knew the symbolism behind the
moment Mao was extending an olive branch
to all those old comrades who he had
pretty much forsaken Lin Biao going out
and the kind of style he did he turned
himself into the ultimate scapegoat and
right there a Chinese funeral Mao
pointed at Lin biles ghost and said he
to blame for all the suffering endured
by Chagny that sure was a harbinger of
things to come for just about anything
that needed to be spun in the right
direction Lin made the perfect fall guy
Mao ended up paying a price though for
attending Chinese funeral in the form of
pneumonia
he caught followed by a pulmonary heart
condition - had to his physical woes the
Chairman's condition became even more
fragile than ever before it was most
certainly a testament to the abilities
and skills of Mao's doctors that he
managed to hang in there for almost 5
more years
Mao wasn't ready to meet Marx just yet
he recovered from this shock to his
system and to the party and when he was
back to his old self again he began to
attend meetings and get back into the
swing of things this is when Joe and I
realized that he was becoming Myles next
target
if Mao had died there all probability
with no successor waiting in the wings
Joe and lye would have been made the de
facto leader of the party Mao knew
despite all their power
John Ching and the leftist did not have
the relationships within the military
and the government that Joe had and that
they'd be taken down easy therefore and
for the remainder of Joe and lies days
he wore a target on his back
and Chairman Mao aimed for it all the
time and his instrument was of course
Jung King a lot of good Joe's loyalty
had done him going back 37 years to the
Sunni conference in 1935 Joe had watched
miles back and at every moment when mal
was vulnerable Joe had been there to
help him get past the moment against his
better judgment Joe and light had
carried out mouths will going back to
the anti-rightist campaign the Great
Leap Forward the Third Front and during
the horrific disaster that became the
Cultural Revolution in the end however
it was all for naught there was no
reward for premier Joe and lye no happy
ending nothing that could be construed
as positive payback for all the
loyalties showed the Chairman it would
have been nice for Joe
Mao has simply left him alone to do his
job and clean up the destruction wrought
by the Cultural Revolution but that
wasn't meant to be
in his last year's Mao grew to really
dislike Jo and in his dying years Mao
was able to cause his premier the worst
form of physical pain topped with
copious amounts of mental anguish that
was Jo's reward for almost four decades
of loyalty to my land loyalty to the
party and service to China
three months after Nixon came and went
in February 1972 Jo and I was diagnosed
with bladder cancer
his doctors recommended a treatment that
offered about an 80 to 90 percent chance
of recovery but there was this strange
rule in the world of Chung nan hai for
standing committee members and I think
this extended anyone in the Politburo as
well
Chairman Mao had to sign off on all
medical treatments when told of Jo's
malady mouths instructions were to keep
the extent of the seriousness a secret
both the premier and dummying Chow were
not to be told
Mao also instructed that there be no
further exams carried out and no surgery
the record is pretty clear the mile
denied the treatment that might have
saved Jo so while the cancer began to
build a life for itself inside Jo and
lies body not only was treatment denied
Jo had found himself under all kinds of
scrutiny and borderline persecution for
things that had happened decades before
that Jeong Ching and her team had been
able to dig up using their own version
of wool mouths everywhere all kinds of
petty BS things from long ago that were
questionable at best were waved in front
of Jo as if he had sold the country and
the party down the river yeah by 1972
73-mile knew was gonna be a race to the
finish between him and Jo and ly as far
as who outlived the other and Mao was
determined to rattle his Premier's cage
to the great man's dying day and mom
became obsessed that he outlived Jo that
was necessary at all costs
Mao was making
all this noise and subjecting Joe to
endless hostile criticism in order to
get him to openly say the magic words
that he Joe and Lai was not going to be
mouths successor so Joe dutifully let
these words ring out in a major speech
quote it is absolutely necessary and
practical for me a man who has committed
serious mistakes and the struggles over
party line to discuss the six previous
such struggles I always thought and will
always think that I cannot be at the
helm and can only be an assistant when
you are all made aware of my historical
mistakes you will be able to break with
superstitions and in this spirit you
have the right to make sure that I
undergo the necessary reform and if I
fail to carry out this reform and end up
committing even bigger mistakes then you
certainly have the right to request that
the party center engage in a lengthy
discussion but for more serious
transgressions I should be deprived of
all my formal positions this is party
life has established by Chairman Mao and
quote well this should a satisfied Mao
with those words spoken
unless Joe's supporters physically
picked him up and plopped him on the
throne he had disqualified himself from
being chosen or even presuming to be
Mao's successor or even worthy and
suitable for the party chairmanship Joe
sidestep mah with those words I'm sure
even Joe himself didn't want or even
need to take over in the event of Mao's
death well this thing's turned out it
was a moot point anyway so for the time
being for Mao to further make Joe's life
miserable because of the succession
reason it was simply to go on beating a
dead horse Joe made it clear he was
neither worthy suitable nor capable case
closed
there was something else and man did
this ever make Chairman Mao unhappy
after the Nixon visit it was like Joe
and I became George Michael and Mao
became Andrew Ridgeley the world press
major political leaders celebrities
major people that seemed since Nixon
left Joe had become this global
phenomenon and no one was saying how
cool and great Chairman Mao was all this
shine that Joe received
the wake of the week that changed the
world really rubbed mile the wrong way
and add it to his suspicions about jo
Jung Ching and her coterie began making
all kinds of noise about how Jo and I
gave everything away to the Americans
and I we poorly managed the relationship
with the Soviets they said anything they
could think of that could diminish Jo's
achievement and naturally Mao didn't
stop her these days 1972-73
and basically until the end came Mao was
living like the Hermit at Peking two
women have pretty much almost exclusive
access to Mao one was his grandniece
Wang hi wrong the other was Nancy Tong
when Zhang Wang hi wrongs role was to
keep her uncle well informed of
everything Jo did said or wrote down Mao
never kept a closer eye on Jo than he
did now in the face of what was
obviously another huge costly blunder by
Chairman Mao two in a row I might add if
you don't figure the third front into
the mix the Cultural Revolution seemed
destined to be judged by the party as a
mistake with Mao believing the Cultural
Revolution to be his greatest legacy a
lot of his attention went into
preserving this that's how long home one
later got helicoptered into the lofty
stratosphere of chum nan high politics
the legacy of the cultural revolution
became Mao's last and final obsession as
jung ching wailed on about Jo loudly
forcefully disrespectfully at Politburo
meetings about that capitulation esteem
n't he worked out called the Shanghai
communique and his alleged bungling of
Soviet relations Jo had to fall back
into survival mode this was old had many
years ago but now after so many heart
attacks and now stricken with cancer it
wasn't as easy as it used to be sapped
his strength more easily the Paris Peace
Accords that ended the Vietnam War well
sort of that that Jo has such a major
hand in were signed on January 27 1970
even amidst this storm and fight for
political survival Joe never let up in
his thankless role as Premier and
foreign minister later on years after
the fall of the gang of four when John
King was getting her comeuppance at her
trial she famously said that she was
mouths dog and when he told it a bite
she bit well starting around 1973 mild
took the leash off and allowed John King
to go after Joe and lie and bite him til
her heart's content this is the time
when the core group that surrounded
Jeong Ching came to be known as the Gang
of Four gem ching chong 2000 y'all when
you add and young one home one Mouse ear
presumptive since he was elevated to
vice-chairman status at the ten he party
congress also around this time mao made
a call to the shinji n county tractor
factory near Nanchang jimsy province and
pulled him to send thunk Xiao ping back
to the capital Tung had been laying low
there since 1969
despite his fall from grace Mao had
always had a pretty good feeling as far
as dung shoppings personal loyal to him
went dung have supported Mao back in the
30s at some key moments that had not
been forgotten by the Chairman Mao's
intention was to use dung as a lever to
counter Jo in the government and to act
as the tip of the spear to lead the
criticism against Jo and lying to bring
dung back at this time was a wise move
besides being quite capable and
experienced dunk head up till now been
loyal tomorrow so bringing him back was
a kind of test of his continued loyalty
a test that of course we all know dong
shellping will fail Jiang Qing was
outraged she hated done from way back
when those two never had any patience
for each other
jo knew how to handle her and keep her
as benign as possible and when that was
impossible and she was at her worst
hurling insults and trying to browbeat
Jo into submission
jo had the patience to sit back and
endure it jo knew no matter what as long
as Mao wanted him alive
jun-chan couldn't do anything except
blow smoke and call him names but dung
on the other hand he was not like this
when John cheek got in his face he got
right back into hers so this bitter
struggle with him the inner core of the
party became a fact of life Moll wasn't
doing anything to ameliorate it he saw
what Dunn was doing bringing people back
from disgrace putting things in order
this is what Joe had always tried to do
so Maya was hoping Dunn was gonna do one
thing but he went and did another dumb
wasn't in the whole continuous
revolution thing the same way ma was for
Mau it wasn't enough that they had won
in 1949 they had to keep the revolution
going and never stopped dung parted ways
with Mau there now it was time to
rebuild the country it was the lack of
luster that the Cultural Revolution had
taken on since the lianbao incident that
mostly allowed Joe and now dung as well
to begin to restore order this began to
mean that leftist who had made
themselves at home in the new order had
to step aside but Mao had one last fight
in him and he wasn't gonna let Joe and
Lai succeed he was so sure that Joe and
I was his long-lost Khrushchev to
counter Joe and to preserve as national
and revolutionary legacy after he died
Mao had to make sure the leftists were
still around a fight against any
attempts at revisionism the magnitude of
the nonsense that Joe and I at the face
in this desperate hour for China boggles
the mind
the last and final campaign that Mao
unleashed on Joe was the pealing pecan
campaign criticized Lin Biao criticized
Confucius campaign this was some
convoluted political smear campaign that
started off as a way to reconcile my
thought with Chinese history but morphed
into a campaign to criticize Lin Yao
then in early 1975 when Joe was too weak
to defend himself the campaign turned
into an all-out attack on him and his
allies most notably done the peeling pea
Kong nonsense
on unabated until the arrest of the gang
of four it was a last desperate twisted
political campaign used by Mao and his
leftist supporters to wreak some final
havoc on the nation by attacking and
disabling China's most capable leaders
in March 1974 Mao had sent dong Xiao
ping to represent China at the UN six
special session Mao coulda let Joe have
this moment but feeling how he was the
great helmsman acted spitefully and son
Tong instead the truth is even if Mao
had given Joe the nod he was too sick
for such an ordeal maybe he could have
gotten it all together to have this one
last great moment on the world stage but
in any case Joe and light at the swallow
his pride and sign off on the order from
Mao to send thong Xiao ping instead that
was mouths direct order Junction was so
out of control and bold that she went
off on the Chairman's decision and made
a big stink about allowing Tung to go so
in a rare moment of Instant Karma
now publicly chastised John Chiang and
told her in so many words do not
challenge his decision and to be careful
moving forward or else by the time Tong
Xiao ping was showing his face around
the United Nations in April 1974 Joe and
lies cancer was now raging out of
control from this point forward his team
of doctors will be working around the
clock simply to keep him alive you know
when something could have been done ma
wouldn't allow the doctors to save Joe
and lie so the cancer simply took its
natural course and now it was 2 years
later and his tumor on Joe's bladder had
more than enough time to metastasize and
take over his life one of the greatest
if not be greatest unsung hero of PRC
history yet yin yang appealed to Mao to
allow the doctors to treat the premier
he went to bat for Joe and got Mao to
finally give in on this urgent matter
much to the chagrin of the Gang of Four
Mao said it was ok to examine the
premier but no treatment the doctors
secretly treated Joanne lie anyway
but the fact was there wasn't much they
could do to save them for the remainder
of his days Joe and lies life was one of
constant blood loss followed by blood
transfusions by June 1st 1974 Joe at his
first operation followed by a second one
two months later by the time of this
August surgery Joe and lies health was
in the stage where he could go at any
time but he did muster up some strength
following the second surgery to attend
the ceremony to celebrate the 25th
anniversary of the founding of the PRC
something that nobody could deny yet a
major hand in doing Joe and lies illness
was the worst kept secret in Beijing so
when the premier slowly shuffled to the
podium to speak that day September 30th
1974 those assembled inside the Great
Hall the people gave him an enthusiastic
ovation it went on and on and people in
the back were even standing on their
chairs to participate in the moment
everyone knew he had been unjustly
dragged through the mud throughout the
entirety of the Cultural Revolution and
especially since the fall of Lin Bo the
message was clear as far as we're the
party faithful stood on a matter of
comrade Joe and lie the following year
Joe was too ill to attend the National
Day celebrations but by the fall of 1975
thumb shopping had already taken over
most of the Premier's responsibilities
when 49 formerly disgraced veterans
appeared that day and the Great Hall of
the people who was a major signal that a
page was turning and PRC history it said
when they wheeled out general bull
reaching who had suffered so unjustly
donging Chow left her seek to come to
him and shake his hand warmly and show
her respect on behalf of herself and her
husband Mao didn't attend the 25th
anniversary event in 1974 but word has
it he wasn't amused with the ovation Joe
got CCTV played the whole thing down as
far as the outpouring of support for
premier Joe and some of his remarks were
edited out up till then Mao was so sure
he was finally going to be able to tear
showdown but after such a spontaneous
outpouring of affection for the premiere
he couldn't very well go in for the kill
now but Joe was dying Mao was kept
informed daily of every known aspect of
the progression of Joe's illness that he
was in a constant state of horrific pain
and fighting for his life meant little
to Mao and even less to Jiang Cheng she
would do things like call meetings and
demand his attendance or you know visit
him in the hospital room that had become
his office and still she continued to
berate him and poor whatever scorn she
could and resist every reasonable
decision he made Mao wouldn't let Joe go
peacefully he too had his demands one of
which was for Joe to gather up enough
strength to put together the fourth
National People's Congress
the third NPC was back in 1964 so this
matter of the next People's Congress was
way overdue Mao had hoped that in
bringing back the Michelle pain he could
be a kind of counterbalance to chungqing
zany antics he underestimated the
disdain with which both those two held
each other
Dunn played on all Jung Kings
shortcomings and wasn't intimidated at
all by her when they were alone Joe and
I would tell dunked be careful back down
once in a while he warned Tung about the
probable consequences if he went too far
but this aspect of being able to make
all these strategic compromises that was
second nature to Joe and Lai wasn't part
of tongues basic makeup so it was no
wonder that dung finally got swatted
down dongs most visible crime was the
bringing back of all these old cadres
and former leaders seven years before
most of these people were wearing dunce
hats and placards describing their
crimes now I think we're back in their
old offices getting in on the sudden
reforms that required their expertise or
experience by 1975 there were a lot of
these people clocking in at work again
and if these people were the enemies
targeted by the Cultural Revolution and
they were back in their old positions
well what did they
play by the time of the fourth National
People's Congress Mao was stymied he had
put too much faith in Jiang Chang she
turned out to be a weapon that lacked
any kind of precision
she and her followers were incompetent
and mild looked on in agony as those who
thought like Joanne limeade monkeys out
of Jiang Cheng and the leftist Jo had
stolen the limelight again at the fourth
NPC everyone there watched him on that
day in January 1975 knew this would most
likely be his last final major public
appearance indeed this was he wasn't
able to rise from his bed too often
afterwards and this final speech Jo
proposed something that he had tried
unsuccessfully to champion back in 1963
now in 1975 with the timing being more
desperate than ever
jo and I proposed a project called the
four modernizations and everything you
can see today as far as China's great
achievements in agriculture industry
defense and science and technology can
trace its roots to this 1975 NPC speech
Joanne lies last by mid-1975 dung had
taken things sufficiently far enough
whereby Mao decided it was time to take
him down John Cheng baited dung wherever
whenever and she knew how to spin
everything when she went back and
reported to her husband from a sickbed
Jo and I watched dung fall right into
mousetrap the political climate had
seemed ripe to stand up to John Chiang
and her attempts to create trouble and
sow discord but Jo saw what Mao was
doing it was the February
counter-current of 1967 all over again
Mao sitting back letting everyone say
whatever they wanted done of course did
not back down to Chongqing and said
words that you know he maybe live to
regret later the summer of 1975 when all
this was happening
jo isn't a bad
way he didn't even weigh 80 pounds he
was attended to 24 hours a day he tried
to appeal to Mao personally in a letter
to let him die in peace but Mao just
couldn't let go the hatred I guess
burned too deep in Mao's last 18 months
who could tell for sure how his thought
process worked he was in his 80s sick as
a dog from all kinds of cardiovascular
pulmonary and neurological diseases no
one ever saw him except his aides no one
could predict what mal would do with
Chang Ching and her gang being mao sole
supplier of news and information
it wasn't a difficult task to rile the
Chairman and make him strike he may have
been on his last legs but he was still
Chairman Mao yet geunyang and Jo both
tried to talk some sense in the dung
Xiao ping to not act so boldly and to
give him out some face dung shell paying
in true fashion acted according to what
he believed was right results from his
reforms and measures were just beginning
to be seen Jo and Marshall yet tried to
talk some sense to dung and let him know
fixing the country wasn't Chairman Mao's
priority dung had won over the two
ladies Wong hi wrong and Nancy Tong so
Mao seeing this got rid of them is his
principal aids and go-betweens and their
place came one of the late comers to the
whole Cultural Revolution epoch this was
mouse nephew Magen Xin he became the new
gatekeeper Mao's last and final oil
assistant now decided to give dung one
last and final test he wanted dung to
publicly declare a major speech that
despite everything the Cultural
Revolution was still 70 percent good
this had to be uttered by dung and it
had to be uttered in a major forum where
it would go on the public record by
doing it this way it made it difficult
for anyone to backpedal later on after
mob had passed Mao and Sheen represented
his uncle at Politburo meetings and
Dooley
ported all the proceedings the way Mao
was hearing things from his nephew Tong
was continuing to challenge him and so
for this reason dung shopping needed to
be taken down at a Politburo meeting
John Chang was allowed to attack him
mercilessly soon it became clear that
Mao had abandoned him to the rage of the
leftists in November December 1975 dung
was given his last chance to recant and
agree with Mao's 70% deal he wouldn't do
it
seeing that thumb was cruisin for a
bruisin Joe had to take matters into his
own hand Mao had ignored his letter from
mid-1975 offering to resign as premier
and make dung his replacement Joe
thereupon took it upon himself to defy
Mao and start passing the word around
that dum was his choice as a successor
on September 7 1975 in his last ever
meeting with a foreign delegation this
one from Romania Joe had announced on
the record that dung had already taken
over many of his day-to-day duties as
premier and was diligently carrying out
the planning of the four modernizations
Joe knew what he was doing from his
hospital bed often writhing in agony
from the pain
Joe got the word out in the global press
dum was his successor and China was
sticking with the four modernizations
Joe believed this would preempt any
attempt by Mao to derail dung and the
whole suckish and aqua in mid-september
Joe had his fourth operation let me
recount what one of Joe's doctors
witness I'm lifting this quote from
Gawain Chin's book Joe and live last
perfect revolutionary quote wheeled up
to the operating room
Joe suddenly turned his head to the
right and said in a heavy but low hushed
voice where is comrade Xiao ping please
ask him to come here
I immediately passed the word back
comrade Xiao ping the premier has
requested your presence dung hurried to
be next to the premier who took his
trembling hand and voice shaking with
emotion shouted out for all to hear
comrade Xiao ping your work
over the years has shown that you are
truly tougher than I am Don was
overwhelmed with emotion when he heard
this accolade from the premier and with
great solemnity she shook Joe's hand as
firmly as he could
standing there without saying a word
done then waved his hands in a salute
sending Joe off to the operating room
wishing the premier a safe journey as he
wiped away his tears end quote
it wasn't a long operation the doctors
opened up the premier and closed him up
right away there was nothing that could
be done the cancer had spread throughout
his body and it was now just a matter of
months if not weeks as soon as Joe and
Lai breathed his last
Tung Xiao ping knew his main benefactor
would be gone and he'd be left
unprotected
therefore it was imperative to keep Joe
alive
these were thuggish instructions to the
medical team extend his life as long as
possible limit the pain Joe had the
upper hand now Joe head in his dying
days if the two speeches he gave in 74
and 75 were any indication had quite a
sky-high public approval rating there
for the remaining months of Joe's life
were spent using all his political
capital to try to protect the Michelle
Peng except there wasn't much Joe could
do anymore he hadn't left his bed since
October 75 he was in and out of
consciousness always wracked with the
most unbearable pain and suffering that
cancer had to offer every waking hour
was a struggle it said that Joe in order
to remain as clear-headed as possible as
such a desperate hour for Dennis
shellping would often refuse painkillers
but as the Year 1975 began to wind down
tongue champagne was for all intents and
purposes on his own as soon as it was
obvious Joe was in his final days if not
hours ma went after dung and indeed
after six major surgeries and over a
hundred blood transfusions at 9:25 in
the morning January 8th 1976 Joe and
lies suffering finally came to
and from the time he had moved his
residence to the hospital until the end
of 1975 when it was too sick to see
anyone Joe had met with 63 foreign
delegations which included heads of
state attended 161 meetings left the
hospital 20 times sometimes just so that
Junction could have a little fun
sometimes four major occasions like the
fourth NPC speech when he announced the
four modernizations
it's not sure if anyone expected this or
not but the national outpouring of grief
was unprecedented in every corner of
China people were visibly affected by
Joe's passing many an a who can protect
us now kind of a way it said that when
Mao was told about Joe's passing he was
speechless and just stared straight
ahead but his nurse told a source that
tears ran down his face that evening as
he sat alone in his study hospital
bedroom suite well even in death Joe and
light did not stray too far from the
principles he always lived by the main
thrust of his funeral instructions were
don't make a big fuss don't spend a lot
of money no monument no grave do not
enter his ashes at Baba Shan he
instructed that his ashes be scattered
over the rivers and mountains of China
On January 10th his body lay in state
40,000 selected guests were permitted to
attend the wake
no one was permitted to send flowers
wear armbands or to exhibit any of the
traditional ways that Chinese express
grief on these occasions the next day
the hearse carry Joe's body away to the
cemetery for cremation then unannounced
this was pre-internet days but there
were ways in Chinese society to get the
word out fast when that hearse made the
20-mile drive to the cemetery two
million people filed out of their homes
and workplaces to line the streets
I'm guessing China on road and they
stood there silently as the car passed
but the sound of their grief was
deafening
chose wishes were carried out dunking
child-led all the funeral arrangements
true to her husband's demands dong Ling
chow
never held any party or government
positions she merely served her husband
and who knows how many different ways
she was his Abigail Adams Eleanor
Roosevelt but with her husband gone she
was sort of out of luck as far as a
stable income you know worthy of her
status one mile did a nice thing though
and set her up as a vice chairman of the
National People's Congress which gave
dummying Chow and of status and rank to
live according to the standards that the
widow of Joe and Lai should have lived
she lived to the ripe old age of 88
passing away in 1992 she got to live to
see Tong Xiao ping carry on her late
husband's legacy with Joe and like gone
thumb shopping knew it wouldn't be long
the attacks on him became too difficult
to defend without mouse intervention On
February 3rd 1976 to show how out of
favor dum was Mao hit wah wah Fung named
as acting premier to replace Joe Jiang
Cheng was miffed at this she had been
counting on Wong home when getting that
post when done saw that he the obvious
choice and Joe's chosen successor was
not selected to serve as premier and
that wasn't a good sign the struggle
between the Gang of Four and their
allies and those who supported dong all
the allies of Joe and Lai continued on
until April 1976 when the April 5th tnmn
incident went down
Joe Enlai even in death continued to
defy Mao the passing of Joe and ly had
acted like a catalyst that strengthened
the resolve of everyone by March 1976
more and more you could see all kinds of
anti Jung Chang anti Gang of Four
posters and graffiti around town that
she was openly despised by the people of
Beijing and was well known fact but Mao
was dying and she had to step on the gas
if she was gonna grab hold of the reins
of power she got her chance on April 5th
seventy-six the changming holiday grave
sweeping day for thousands of years
tradition had called for people to go to
the graves of their ancestors burn
incense offer prayers and sweep the
graves
well people started carrying reefs and
flowers to Tiananmen Square and laying
them down at the monument to the heroes
everything was directed at Jo and ly
grief love devotion respect and to show
defiance as well a lot of people defied
the Gang of Four on that day and by
extension Chairman Mao
John King called in the police and had
everything cleared away but still more
came over 300,000 people came out to
Tiananmen Square that date offense
against John King and the Gang of Four
and to mourn their fallen premier so Mao
gave the Gang of Four the okay to dump
on dung Xiao ping and blame him for this
whole counter-revolutionary action so
just like that Don was purged and all
his positions of authority were taken
from him but once again Mao stepped in
and stayed the hand of John Chiang when
it came to kicking thong out of the
party for now he retained his party
membership so Don was out on May 11th
Mao suffered another in a line of heart
attacks that pretty much from that point
forward put him out of commission June
now had another heart attack July 6th
marshal Judah passed away then on the
morning of July 28th the ground shook
for about 16 seconds in and around the
city of tung-shun 7.8 on the Richter
scale hundreds of thousands died though
incapacitated and confined to his bed
Mao felt the ground shake from his
bedroom and jounin high as a student of
Chinese history surely mound knew what
this natural disaster pretended then
again in September Mao had yet another
heart attack and finally just past
midnight on September 9 1976 Mao Zedong
died and to tie the story up at the nice
pretty bow shortly after miles
yet yin-yang Li xiannian Hua Guofeng and
Wang dong Shing rose to the occasion and
had the Gang of Four and all their
followers arrested and this whole 10
year long parade of madness and
destruction came to an end this time
with no Chairman Mao to get in the way
to keep things going this year 2016
marks a half a century since the start
of the Cultural Revolution in 1966 I'm
sure there'll be plenty of discussion
about its legacy as for Jo and ly we saw
in these past episodes and we managed to
survive the upheaval from the moment he
became politically inspired in 1919
after the may 4th movement all through
his years and France Guangzhou Shanghai
Chongqing on the run with Mao fighting
the civil war and finally after
liberation building the Chinese state
and all its institutions reaching out to
world leaders in the name of peace and
friendship and in the process winning
the hearts of all Chinese people in the
end Mao rewarded Jo's contribution to
China to the party and to himself with
10 years of the worst kind of political
persecution short of imprisonment and
death as sometimes think what if someone
so capable as Jo and light had been
allowed to lead the Chinese state
without any of the impediments that Mao
threw at him without the handicap of
Chairman Mao and his political
machinations who knows how far Jo could
have taken China but despite all the
challenges from Chairman Mao the Gang of
Four and all his detractors Jo and lai
laid the groundwork for China's embrace
of Geiger Kaifeng reform and opening-up
to the outside world much of what you
see today in the PRC does the result so
Joanne Lai ladies and gentlemen not only
a great figure in Chinese history but in
world history as well the debate will go
on as to his achievements as culpability
and enabling Mao successes
isn't any other dirt that might be dug
up on him but the record is pretty clear
by any accounts Joe and I was a rather
special world historic figure and human
being well that's it for now
another longer-than-expected episode
we're at triple overtime here hey Joe
and lye he's worth it
this is Lazlo Montgomery wishing you all
the very best all the time and do please
consider joining me again won't you for
another exciting episode of the China
history podcast